At long last,

the battle has ended.

And thus,

Ghana, your beloved country,

is free forever.

And yet again,

I want to take this opportunity

to thank the chiefs and people of Ghana

for all that they have done for Ghana’s independence.

We have won the battle

and again rededicate ourselves,

in the struggle to emancipate the African continent.

We pledge ourselves to work unceasingly

to shoulder the responsibilities

that go with independence.

We are going to demonstrate to the world,

to other nations,

that we are prepared to lay our own foundation,

that we are strong enough to establish our own African personality.

We are going to create our own African society,

not patterned after any other society,

but one based on African ideals and principles,

and our own culture.

We are going to establish a society

in which justice and freedom

will reign.

We shall measure our progress

by the improvement in the health of our people;

by the number of children in school;

and by the quality of their education;

by the availability of water and electricity in our towns and villages;

and by the happiness which our people take in being able to manage their own affairs.

We are prepared to face all disappointments

that may come our way.

We are prepared to face all obstacles

that stand in our path.

We have confidence in ourselves,

and in our ability to chart our own destiny.

We are going to see that we create the necessary machinery

by which we can ensure that the independence of Ghana

becomes a living reality to every man, woman, and child.

It is not possible for a country to be truly independent

unless it is economically independent.

We therefore pledge ourselves

to pursue a policy of industrialization

so that Ghana may be self-sufficient.

We shall not allow ourselves

to be exploited or dominated again.

We shall ensure that the resources of Ghana

are used for the benefit of the people of Ghana.

From now on,

we are no longer a colonial but a free and independent people.

We must live up to the name of Ghana,

the proud name of Ghana.

We must live up to the standards of Ghana.

We must show the world that Africans are capable

of managing their own affairs.

Our independence is meaningless

unless it is linked up with the total liberation

of the African continent.

We therefore dedicate ourselves

to the great cause of African unity.

Long live Ghana.

Long live Africa.

Long live African unity.
