Congolese men and women,

Victorious independence fighters,

I salute you in the name of the Congolese government.

You, my friends, who fought tirelessly at our side, I ask you to make this 30th of June 1960 an illustrious date which will remain engraved forever in your hearts, a date whose meaning you will proudly teach to your children, so that they may know by what glorious struggle their ancestors won liberty for all of us.

Although this independence of the Congo is being proclaimed today in agreement with Belgium, a friendly country with whom we deal as equals, no Congolese worthy of the name will ever be able to forget that it was won by struggle, a struggle carried on day by day, a struggle in which we were not spared deprivation or suffering, and for which we gave our strength and our blood.

We are proud of this struggle, of tears, of fire, and of blood, to the depths of our being, for it was a noble and just struggle, and indispensable to put an end to the humiliating slavery which was imposed upon us by force.

This was our fate for eighty years of colonial rule, our wounds are too fresh and too painful still for us to drive them from our memory.

We have known ironies, insults, blows endured morning, noon, and night because we were “Negroes.”

We have seen that our lands were seized in the name of supposedly legal laws, which in fact recognized only the right of the strongest.

We have seen that the law was never the same, whether it concerned a white or a black; accommodating for the former, cruel and inhuman for the latter.

We have witnessed atrocious sufferings of those condemned for their political opinions or religious beliefs; exiled in their own country, their fate truly worse than death itself.

We have seen that in the towns there were magnificent houses for the whites and crumbling shanties for the blacks, that a black was not admitted in cinemas, restaurants, and so-called European stores.

We have seen that a black traveled in the holds, at the feet of the whites in their luxury cabins.

Who will ever forget the massacres where so many of our brothers perished, the cells into which those who refused to submit to a regime of oppression and exploitation were thrown?

All that, my brothers, we have endured.

But we, whom the vote of your elected representatives has called to direct our dear country, we who have suffered in our body and soul from colonial oppression, we tell you very loudly: all that is now ended.

The Republic of the Congo has been proclaimed, and our beloved country is now in the hands of its own children.

Together, my brothers, my sisters, we are going to begin a new struggle, a sublime struggle, which will lead our country to peace, prosperity, and greatness.

Together, we are going to establish social justice and ensure that everyone has a fair remuneration for his labor.

We are going to show the world what the black man can do when he works in freedom, and we are going to make of the Congo the center of the sun’s radiance for all of Africa.

We are going to keep a watchful eye on foreign lands, but we will not tolerate any attempt at colonialist domination or interference.

We ask foreign countries to help us, but we will not accept their imposition.

We will rely on our own strength and will not hesitate to call on foreign cooperation whose aims we clearly understand and which respects our sovereignty.

The Congo’s independence marks a decisive step towards the liberation of the entire African continent.

Our government, strong, national, popular, will be the health of our country.

I call upon all Congolese citizens, men, women, and children, to set themselves resolutely to the task of creating a national economy and ensuring our economic independence.

Eternal glory to the fighters for national liberation!

Long live independence and African unity!

Long live the independent and sovereign Congo!

